Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today we're
going to talk about arithmetic with Hindu-Arabic
numbers. We're going to talk about addition,
subtraction, and multiplication, and we'll have
a few things to say that are quite interesting
for primary school education. Let's start off with
the simplest one: addition. Naively, we have two
strings of ones, which are for us natural numbers.
To add them, we just put them together in the
obvious way. The second level of complexity is
with Roman numerals, where we peeled off some 10,
which we write as X's. So we recognize this number
as 10, 10, 1—that's 21—plus the other one, 15. And
to add them with Roman numerals, we just put all
the X's together and we put all the ones together
to give us 36. With Hindu-Arabic notation,
we represent this by 21 (2 tens, 1 one) and this
by 15 (1 ten and 5 ones). To add them, we can put
them on top of each other like this, and when
we add the ones and we add the tens, we get 36.
So it gets a little bit more complicated if we
have bigger numbers. So here is another example,
which turns out to be 16 plus 19. In Roman
numerals, we put them together, we get two X's
(20), and then we have a string of ones. But we
have agreed with the Roman numeral notation that
we're not going to allow 10 or more strings.
Whenever we have 10 or more of a certain kind,
we exchange it for a higher denomination.
So here we have a string of ones,
we peel off a 10 and replace it
with another X. It's an exchange,
and so we end up with XXX and 5 ones—that's 35. So
how does it work in Hindu-Arabic notation? Well,
we put the 16 on top of the 19, we add the
6 and 9, we get 15. And the corresponding
thing here is to put five ones here and to peel
the other 10 ones off and write it as a single
10. So you're adding one 10 to the tens column,
and then we add the tens to get 35 altogether.
Another example: same idea. Let's say we have
247 + 385. We start with the ones: 7 + 5 is 12,
which we write as 2 ones and 1 ten. Then
altogether, the tens, we have 13 tens,
which we write as 3 tens + 10 tens. And that
10 tens is written as 1 hundred and goes in
the hundreds column. And altogether, we have 6
hundreds, so we have 632 as the final answer.
Now let's have a look at subtraction,
the inverse operation to addition.
If we have this number and we want to subtract
this number, what it means is that effectively
we're peeling off a number of ones just equal to
the number there. So we're going to peel off these
four ones, and whatever we have left over is the
final answer. In terms of Roman numerals, we have
this minus this, and it's easy to see that 7 ones
minus 4 ones is 3 ones, so we end up with 13. In
terms of Hindu-Arabic notation, 17 - 4, we write
17 - 4: 7 ones minus 4 ones is 3 ones, and 10
tens minus 0 tens is 10 tens, so we get 13. That
mimics what we're doing with the Roman numerals.
Here's a more complicated example where we have
34 - 16. Now to make that subtraction with Roman
numerals, we can't quite do it because
we have 4 ones and we need to subtract
6 ones—that doesn't work. So we change one of
the tens here for 10 ones, giving us 14 ones,
which we can then subtract 6 from, giving us 8
ones. And we have 2 tens minus 1 ten, which is a
single ten. What we do with Hindu-Arabic notation
is exactly parallel to this. So we write 34 - 16:
4 - 6 doesn't work, so we need to change one of
our tens for 10 ones. Instead of having 3 tens,
we now have 2 tens. Instead of having 4 ones, we
now have 14 ones. The actual number that we've got
hasn't changed, just the denominations that are
involved have changed. But now 14 - 6—that works,
that gives us 8. And 2 - 1 is 1, so
we have 18 as the answer. And that
corresponds to what happens in real life.
If I have $34 in three tens and four ones,
and you come up and ask me for $16, then I'm going
to have to change one of my tens for 10 ones,
perhaps through some third party, in order to
be able to peel off the right money for you.
Now last year, my daughter in school learned a
different way of doing subtraction which I do not
approve of. This is the way she does subtraction:
34 - 16. Okay, the 4 - 6 doesn't work,
so we're going to add 10 ones for 14, and then to
compensate for that, instead of subtracting 1 ten,
we're going to subtract 2 tens. So 14 - 6 is
8, and 3 - 2 is 1. We get the same answer,
but it's much less intuitively clear what's
going on with this method because it doesn't
correspond to what we actually do in real
life. If I have 34 and I want to give you
16, this corresponds to suddenly getting
10 more from somewhere and then you take
10 more to compensate—that doesn't happen in
real life. It's a good example of where pure
mathematicians can have something to say
about primary school education. If your
child is being taught this way, I don't
think they're being taught the right way.
Now let's have a look at multiplication. The first
thing that children have to do is to learn the
multiplication table. So here is part of the usual
table, and let's assume that we've memorized this
perhaps up to 10x10 or 12x12. I also remind
you of a few of our basic laws: there's the
associative law for multiplication written in
our abbreviated fashion. So a stands for a * b,
and here are the two distributive laws that we've
talked about before. And here is a fancier version
of the distributive law, where we have one
term with two numbers added up times another
term with another two terms added together.
The result is four different multiplications:
a * c plus a * d plus b * c plus b * d. So that's
a combination of these two distributive laws,
and it's very important for understanding how
we actually implement multiplication by hand.
So let's see what happens if we multiply 234 *
3. 234 is really 2 * 100 + 3 * 10 + 4. When we
multiply by 3, we're really using the distributive
law. The 3 is multiplied by this term to give 600,
and also by this term to give 90, and 3 *
4 (this term) gives 12. And then we have
to add up those three things to give us 702.
And by hand, what we do is we write 234 * 3,
and then there are three separate multiplications
that are really involved: 3 * 4 is 12;
3 times this 3 really represents 30, so 3 times
that 30 is really 90; and this 2 represents
200, so 3 * 200 is 600. So there are three
things to be added up. We add them up in columns,
and that's a sure-fire and good way of teaching
multiplication to students to begin with. Later
on, if necessary and they're proficient, you
can do this all in one step. But there's nothing
embarrassing about just doing multiplication this
way step by step. That way you understand that the
distributive law is really what's happening, and
you have as many operations as you do terms here.
Let's have a look at a slightly more complicated
example: 56 * 37. This is an example where we're
implicitly using this law here. So there are
really four separate multiplications going on:
7 * 6 is 42; 7 * 5 (well, this 5 represents
50, so 7 * 50 is 350); this 3 * 6 (well,
that's really 30 * 6—that's 180); and 30
* 50 is 1,500. So there are really those
four separate multiplications, and then we add
them all up using a bit of carrying: 4, 5, 8,
17 (so there's a one that goes up there),
then 10 (one that goes up there), and 2.
So, although better students can do this
in two lines, there's nothing wrong with
weaker students being taught this very
sure-fire methodical way of doing it.
Next time, we're going to talk about the
trickiest operation, which is, of course,
division. And we're going to have some
interesting things to say about long
division. I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
Let me know if you need any further assistance!